CHECKIT 0.2.0
=============

Checkit is a file integrity tool for Linux and Unix systems.

Checkit Copyright (C) 2014 Dennis Katsonis

LICENCE INFO
------------
Checkit is free software distributed under the GNU GPL.  See below for
copyright for CRC64.

WHAT THIS PROGRAM DOES:
-----------------------

Checksum adds additions data assurance capabilities to filesystems which
support extended attributes.  Checkit allows you to detect any otherwise
undetected data integrity issues or file changes to any file.  By storing
a checksum as an extended attribute, checkit provides an easy way to
detect any silent data corruption, bit rot or otherwise modified error.

This was inspired by the checksumming that is performed by filesystems
like BTRFS and ZFS.  These filesystems ensure data integrity by storing
a checksum (CRC) of data and checking read data against the checksum.
With mirroring of data, they can silently heal the data should an error
be found.

This program does not duplicate this ability, but offers rudimentary
checksum abilities for other filesystems.  It simply calculates a
checksum and stores the checksum with the file.  It can then be later
used to verify the checksum against the data.  Any data corruption of
file changes would result in a failed check.

WHY IT WAS CREATED:
-------------------

Moving data from disk to disk, or leaving data on the disk, leaves a
very small possibility of silent data corruption.  While rare, the large
amounts of data being handled by drives make silent corruption a real
possibility.  While BTRFS and ZFS can handle this, other filesystems
can't.  This program was created to add an ability to detect (but not
fix) issues.  With the ability to detect, you can easily find out whether
a copy or extract operation occured perfectly, or whether there has been
bit rot in the file.

Backups provide point of reference, but comparison isn't very efficient,
as it involves reading two files.  Using a CRC, you only need to read
the file once, even after a copy operation to determine whether the file
is OK.  Also, should the file be different from the backup, which copy
is OK, the backup or the original?  Checkit will let you know whether
it is the backup or original which has changed.

There are other ways to do this.  You can use a cryptographic hash
and store a SHA-1 or MD5 or SHA-256 value in a seperate file, or even
use GPG and digitally sign the file.  The problem is, that the value
is stored in a seperate file, and doing directory recursion, or all
files of a particular type (i.e., all JPG's isn't as straighforward.
With checkit, the CRC is stored as an extended attribute.  It remains
as part of the file, and can be copied or archived automatically with
the file.  No need for seperate files to store the hash/checksum.

Checkit also has the ability to export this to a hidden file, and import
it back into an extended attribute.

HOW TO USE:
-----------

Checkit calculates and stores the CRC as an extended attribute
(user.crc64) or as a hidden file.  The file must reside on a filesystem
which supports extended attributes (XFS, JFS, EXT2, EXT3, EXT4, BTRFS,
ReiserFS among
others) to use the extended attribute (recommended).

OPERATION:
----------

checkit [OPTION] [FILE]

Options:

-s	Calcuates and stores the checksum.
-c	Check file against stored checksum.
-v	Verbose.  Print more information.
-p	Display CRC64 checksum.
-x	Remove stored checksum.  This simply deletes the extended
attribute.
-o	Overwite existing checksum.  By default, checkit does not
overwrite an existing checkum.	This option allows you to update the
checksum, should the file be deliberately altered).
-r	Recurse through subdirectories.
-e	Export CRC to a hidden file.
-i	Import CRC from a hidden file.

[FILE] can include wildcards.

Examples:

checkit -s -o picture.jpg	;Calculates checksum of picture.jpg and
overwrites old CRC64
checkit -s -r .			;Processes current directory and all
sub-directories and files.
checkit -c -r pictures/		;Check the enture pictures
directory. Checkit will report whether all files are OK or not.

LIMITATIONS:
------------

As checkit doesn't repair files, you need to ensure that you have backups
of important data.  Checkit by default stores the CRC in an extended
attribute.
This attribute won't be transferred when copying to a filesystem which
doesn't support extended attributes, or archived using an archiver which
doesn't store them.  Note that some file managers may not copy extended
attributes by default.	You should export the checksums to a hidden
file using the -e option beforehand if using an archiver or copying to
a filesystem which does not support extended attributes.

TODO:
-----

* Intergration with file managers.

CRC64 routine.

The checksum routine is the crc-64-jones created by Salvatore Sanfilippo.
